---
layout: post
title: DisjSet
categories:
- Programming
tags:
- C
- ADT

---
* Disjoint Set ADT

---

Given an equivalence relation ~, the natural problem is to decide, for any a and b. There are two permissible operations. The first is *Find*, which returns the name of the set containing a given element. The second operation adds relations. This algorithm is dynamic because during the algorithm, the sets can change via the *union* operation.
{% highlight objc %}
#ifndef _DisjSet_H
typedef int DisjSet[NumSets+1];
typedef int SetType;
typedef int ElementType;

void Initilialize(DisjSet S);
void SetUnion(DisjSet S, SetType Root1, SetType Root2);
SetType Find( ElementType X, DisjSet S);

void Initialize(DisjSet S)
{
  int i;
  for(i=NumSets; i>0; i--)
    S[i]=0;
}
/*Union is a C keyword, so this routine*/
/* is named SetUnion*/
void SetUnion(DisjSet S, SetType Root1, SetType Root2)
{
  S[Root2]=Root1;
}

SetType Find(ElementType X, DisjSet S)
{
  if(S[X]<=0)
    return X;
  else 
    return Find(S[X],S);
}
{% endhighlight %}
The Unions above were performed rather arbitrarily, by making the second tree a subtree of the first. A simple improvement is always to make the smaller tree a subtree of the larger. To implement this strategy, we need to keep track of the size of each tree. Since we are just using an array, we can have the array entry of each root contain the *negative* of the size of its tree.

We can also do the same thing on the *Find* operation, the only change to the *Find* is that S[X] is made equal to the value returned by *Find*; thus after the root of the set is found recursively, X is made to point directly to it
{% highlight objc %}
void SetUnion(DisjSet S, SetType Root1, SetType Root2)
{
  if(S[Root2]<S[Root1]) /*Root2 deeper*/
    S[Root1]=Root2;
  else{
    if(S[Root2]==S[Root1])
      S[Root1]--;
    S[Root2]=Root1;
  }
}
SetType Find(ElementType X, DisjSet S)
{
  if(S[X]<=0)
    return X;
  else 
    return S[X]=Find(S[X],S);
}
{% endhighlight %}
