---
layout: post
title: Hashing
categories:
- Programming
tags:
- C
- ADT

---

* Hash Function
* Separate Chaining
* Open Addressing
* Double Hashing
* Rehashing

---

## Introducation

The ideal hash table data structure is merely an array of some fixed size, containing the keys. Each key is mapped into some number in the range 0 to *TableSize-1* and placed in the appropriate cell. The mapping is called a **hash function**, which ideally should be simple to compute and should ensure that any two distinct keys get different cells.

## Hash Function
If the input keys are integers, then simple returning *Key* mod *TableSize* is generally a reasonable strtegy, unless *Key* happens to have some undesirable properties. For example, if the table size is 10 and the keys all end in zero, the standard hash function always return *0*. It is usually a good idea to ensure that the table size is prime.

Usually, the keys are strings in this case, the hash function needs to be chosen carefully. One option is to add up the *ASCII* values of the characters in the string.
{% highlight objc %}
Index Hash(const char* Key, int TableSize)
{
  unsigned int HashVal=0;
  while(*Key!='\0')
    HashVal+=*Key++;
  return HashVal%TableSize;
}
{% endhighlight %}
If the table size is large, the function does not distribute the keys well. For instance, suppose that *TableSize*=10,007 and all keys are eight or fewer characters long. Since *char* has an integer value that is at most 127. This is clearly not an equitable distribution! (The summation is less likely to be large).

Another hash function is shown. Unfortunately, English is not random. The number of combination of first three character in the function is actually small. Even if none of these combinations *collide*, only 28 percent of the table can actually be hashed to.
{% highlight objc %}
Index Hash(const char* Key, int TableSize)
{
  return(Key[0]+27*Key[1]+729*Key[2])%TableSize;
}
{% endhighlight objc %}

Another hash function described below is not necessarily the best with respect to table distribution, but does have the merit of extreme simplicity.
{% highlight objc %}
Index Hash(const char* Key, int TableSize)
{
  unsigned int HashVal=0;
  while(*Key!='\0')
    HashVal=(HashVal<<5)+*Key++;
  return HashVal%TableSize;
}
{% endhighlight %}
If the Key is too long, a common practice in this case it not to use all the characters. The main programming detail left is collision resolution. If, when an element is inserted, it hashed to the same value as an already inserted element, then we have a *collision* and we discuss two of the simplest method: separate chaining and open addressing.

## Separate Chaining
**Separate chaining** is to keep a list of all elements that hash to the same value. To perform a *Find*, we use the hash function to determine which list to traverse. We then traverse this list in the normal manner, returning the position where the item is found. We use basically the same way to perform *insert*. The type declarations required are defined below. Notice that *TheLists* is actually a pointer to a pointer to a *ListNode* structure.
{% highlight objc %}
#ifndef _HashSep_H

struct ListNode;
typedef struct ListNode* Position;
struct HashTbl;
typedef struct HashTbl * HashTable;

HashTable InitializeTable(int TableSize);
void DestroyTable(HashTable H);
Position Find(ElementType Key, HashTable H);
void Insert(ElementType Key, HashTable H);
ElementType Retrieve(Position P);

#endif /* _HashSep_H */
{% endhighlight %}
The Call *Find(Key,H)* will return a pointer to the cell containing *Key*.The insertion routine is somewhat poorly coded, because it computes the hash function twice.
{% highlight objc %}
struct ListNode
{
  ElementType Element;
  Position Next;
};

typedef Position List;

/* List* TheLists will be an array of lists*/
struct HashTbl
{
  int TableSize;
  List *TheLists;
};

HashTable InitializeTable(int TableSize)
{
  HashTable H;
  int i;
  if(TableSize<MinTableSize)
    {
      error("Table size is too small");
      return NULL;
    }
  /* allocate table */
  H=malloc(sizeof(struct HashTbl));
  if(H==NULL)
    FatalError("Out of space");
  H->TableSize=NextPrime(TableSize);
  /* Allocate array of lists*/
  H->TheLists=malloc(sizeof(List)*H->TableSize);
  if(H->TheLists==NULL)
    FatalError("Out of space!!");
  /* Allocate list headers*/
  for(i=0;i<H->TableSize;i++)
    {
      H->Lists[i]=malloc(sizeof(struct ListNode));
      /* H->TheLists=malloc(H->TableSize*sizeof(struct ListNode)) before the loop*/
      if(H->Lists[i]==NULL)
	FatalError("Out of space!!");
      else
	H->TheLists[i]->Next=NULL;
    }
  return H;
}


Position Find(ElementType Key, HashTable H)
{
  Position P;
  List L;
  L=H->TheLists[Hash(Key,H->TableSize)];
  P=L->Next;
  while(P!=NULL&&P->Element!=Key)
    /* Probably need strcmp*/
    P=P->Next;
  return P;
}

void Insert(ElementType Key, HashTable H)
{
  Position Pos,NewCell;
  List L;
  Pos=Find(Key,H);
  if(Pos==NULL) /*Key is not found*/
    {
      NewCell=malloc(sizeof(struct ListNode));
      if(NewCell==NULL)
	FatalError("Out of space!!");
      else
	{
	  L=H->TheLists[Hash(Key,H->TableSize)];
	  NewCell->Next=L->Next;
	  NewCell->Element=Key;/* probably need strcpy!*/
	  L->Next=NewCell;
	}
    }
}
{% endhighlight %}

## Open Addressing
Separate chaining hashing has the disadvantage of requiring pointers. This tends to slow the algorithm down a bit because of the time required to allocate new cells, and also essentially requires the implementation of a second data structure. In an **open addressing hashing** system, if a collision occurs, alternative cells are tried until an empty cell is found. More formally, cells h_0(x), h_1(x), h_2(x)... are tried in succession, where h_i(X)=(Hash(X)+F(i)) mod TableSize, with F(0)=0. Because all the data go inside the table, a bigger table is needed for open addressing hashing.

- Linear Probing F(i)=i
- Quadratic Probing $$F(i)=i^2$$

## Double Hashing
For double hashing, one popular choicew is F(i)=ihash_2(X). This formula says that we apply a second hash function to X and probe at a distance hash_2(x), 2hash_2(x),..., and so on.

## Rehashing
If the table gets too full, the running time for the operations will start taking too long and *Inserts* might fail for open addressing hashing with quadratic resolution. Rehashing frees the programmer from worrying about the table size and is important because hash tables cannot be made arbitrarily large in complex programs.




